docs/wip-protocol-0.3.md, before:

## Message flow overview

### Send

- Sender (source) creates message and encrypts for each recipient (journalist) individually. Messages are encrypted using HPKE's AuthPSK mode. The "PSK" is $`R_{pq,pk}.encaps()`$ ($`J_{epq,pk}.encaps()`$ for journalist recipients).
  - The message includes the (rest of the) sender pubkey bundle (XWING key, MLKEM key), needed to send replies. It also includes some identifier for the DH-AKEM key (eg a hash) for authentication purposes.\*\*\*
- Sender encrypts message metadata using HPKE Base (unauthenticated) mode (per 9.9 [Metadata protection](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9180.html#name-metadata-protection)). "Metadata" includes:
  - the encapsulated PSK secret (recipient: decaps to get PSK, then pass to HPKE.OpenAuthPSK)
  - the encapsulated DH-AKEM message secret (recipient: pass to HPKE.OpenAuthPSK)
  - the sender's own DH-AKEM pubkey (needed for HPKE.OpenAuthPSK)
- Sender creates message "clue" (a DH agreement, also message called group Diffie Hellman or `mgdh`) between an ephemeral Curve25519 key and recipient fetching key (medium/long-term Curve25519 DH keypair).
- Sender sends an envelope, representing the entire payload to the sever, that contains:
  - the message ciphertext (classical/PQ hybrid, via HPKEAuthPSK)
  - the sealed metadata (hybrid, via XWING)
  - the encapsulation of the metadata shared secret (hybrid, via XWING)
  - the two parts of the mgdh/"clue" (classical/plaintext pubkey, via DH agreement between ephemeral Curve25519 key and recipient Curve25519 Fetching key)
- Note: this payload is represented as (Ciphertext, Clue, Clue Pubkey) in many of our documents, where "ciphertext" refers to the combination of message ciphertext, metadata ciphertext, and metadata shared secret encapsulation.

### Fetch

- Discussed separately below

### Read (decrypt)

(Presumes already retrieved encrypted payload via fetch mechanism)

- Recipient parses payload into metadata, metadata encapsulated secret, and ciphertext
- Recipient opens unauthenticated metadata (hybrid XWING encrypted): `HPKE_METADATA.Open(shared_md_secret_encaps, self.metadata_decaps_key, HPKE_INFO, HPKE_AAD, ct=cmetadata)`
- Recipient parses untrusted metadata into: sender DH-AKEM key, message DH-AKEM shared secret, message PSK shared secret
- Recipient decapsulates message PSK secret using $`R_{pq,sk}`$
- Recipient opens authenticated-sealed ciphertext using HPKE.OpenAuth: `HPKE_MESSAGE.OpenAuth(shared_dhakem_secret_encaps, self.dhakem_decaps_key, HPKE_INFO, HPKE_AAD, ct=cmessage, psk=psk_untrusted, psk_id=HPKE_PSK_ID, pk_s=sender_pkey_bytes_untrusted)`
- Recipient performs all needed checks (i.e., ensure keys provided in unauthenticated-sealed metadata match keys/key identifiers in plaintext, etc)

### Message fetch overview

#### Server

- Along with ciphertext, Sender includes (Clue, Pubkey) in payload, per above. Those are a one-time DH 25519 Pubkey and the DH agreement between that key and the recipient fetch key. The server stores these data and generates a random corresponding UUID, `message_id`, to refer to the location of the ciphertext in its database (don't want to index by incremental values such as row number, since that leaks information to anyone fetching).
- For every fetch request it receives, the server:
  - Generates an ephemeral DH Curve25519 keypair
  - Performs a DH agreement between the existing mgdh/clue and this ephemeral key (3-party DH); the resulting secret is the `kmid`.
  - Symmetrically encrypts the `message_id` UUID with this `kmid`.
  - Performs an DH agreement between the Clue Pubkey and its ephemeral key (2 party DH), called the per-request clue, per-message [per-request] group Diffie Hellman, or `pmgdh`
  - Returns the encrypted message id and the per-request clue
  - Returns additional (dummy) encrypted challenges, so that the number of challenges returned is always constant.

#### Receipient

- Recipient receives a fixed-length, unique per-request set of challenges consisting of tuples of (Per-Message Clue, Encrypted Message ID).
- For each challenge:
  - Recipient performs a DH agreement on each per-request clue/`pmgdh` (3-party), resulting in an output.
  - If they are the intended recipient of a message, this output is the `kmid` that
    the server used to encrypt the message IDs. (Original kmid: constructed via DH(Clue, Server Epehemral SK) == DH(DH(ME_SK, JF_PK),SE_SK); clue constructed via DH(Clue Pubkey, Server Ephemeral SK) == DH(ME_PK, SE_SK); unwinding clue is DH(DH(ME_PK, SE_SK), JF_SK))
- The recipient attempts to decrypt the Encrypted Message ID with the kmid. If successful, they have learned a message id.
- Recipient sends fetch request for the message id.

## Additional notes

### Messaging

- Presumes Newsroom PKI set up (ie FPF has signed Newsroom key, newsroom has signed journalist signing keys. Still TBD whether newsroom or journalist signs journo fetching key.)
- Fetching key lifetime still TBD; might want to make it easier to roll than the journo signing key
- Presumes source verifies signatures on keys before using (omits error checking)
- Source creates message for each journalist individually (n journalists)
- Journalist creates reply for all other journalists + source (n-1 + 1 = n, to be sure that ciphertext numbers match in each direction and avoid attacks that allow for probabilistically identifying a user's role)
- Still for discussion: when key fetch happens (re: key exhaustion, re: avoiding as much timing leakage as possible about lurkers/instance traffic)
- Still for discussion: Message (plaintext) structure. Includes at minimum the pubkeys needed for replies, but could also include NR key/identifier (avoid cross-instance replays), additional application-level metadata.
- "Clue" (output of DH agreement) needs to be exposed by whatever primitives library we are using.
- Error-handling/robust implementation details omitted for clarity for now

### Fetch/delete

- Fuzzy message expiry planned for messages on server (vs one-time delivery, sending a message to the server upon read, or any other mechanisms). This contrasts with the Tamarin model in progres where one-time message delivery is modeled.
- Some discussion about issuing one fetch request (one ID per request) vs fetching multiple IDs at once. For now assume one fetch request is one message ID.
- The ephemeral key used by the sender to generate the Clue isn't included anywhere or bound to the ciphertext at all; in previous designs it was the message ephemeral pubkey. EthZ says it is by design that nothing can link the key to the message; however, is it worth considering identifying the key _inside_ the message ciphertext (eg a key hash)?

\*\*\*: In a unidirectional dead-drop mode, attaching these PQ keys could be avoided, since they are only used for replies.

Commit message:

docs: add explanation of retrieving initial instance keys and signatures.

docs/wip-protocol-0.3.md, after:

## Journalist Enrollemnt

- see protocol.md (TODO)

## Initial keys fetch (`/journalists`)

- Clients visit an endpoint that provides the pubkeys and signatures associated with a given SecureDrop instance:
  - Newsroom pubkey
  - List of journalist signing keys, each signed by the newsroom pubkey
  - For each journalist key:
    - (List of) DH-AKEM long-term reply key(s), each signed by the journalist signing key. (There should be one DH-AKEM long term reply key, but there is a possibility this key could be rotated, and two signed keys would need to be visible until the message expiry period of any messages that could have been sent with the old key had elapsed)

- This material is fetched before a send or a read operation, and allows clients to verify the trust chain of any journalist keys.
  - Additionally, each journalist has a pool of signed one-time key bundles, of the form (DH-AKEM pubkey, ML-KEM pubkey, X-WING pubkey) that are signed with the journalist signing key, and are fetched by a sender in order to address a message to that journalist.

## Message flow overview

### Send

- Sender (source) creates message and encrypts for each recipient (journalist) individually. Messages are encrypted using HPKE's AuthPSK mode. The "PSK" is $`R_{pq,pk}.encaps()`$ ($`J_{epq,pk}.encaps()`$ for journalist recipients).
  - The message includes the (rest of the) sender pubkey bundle (XWING key, MLKEM key), needed to send replies. It also includes some identifier for the DH-AKEM key (eg a hash) for authentication purposes.\*\*\*
- Sender encrypts message metadata using HPKE Base (unauthenticated) mode (per 9.9 [Metadata protection](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9180.html#name-metadata-protection)). "Metadata" includes:
  - the encapsulated PSK secret (recipient: decaps to get PSK, then pass to HPKE.OpenAuthPSK)
  - the encapsulated DH-AKEM message secret (recipient: pass to HPKE.OpenAuthPSK)
  - the sender's own DH-AKEM pubkey (needed for HPKE.OpenAuthPSK)
- Sender creates message "clue" (a DH agreement, also message called group Diffie Hellman or `mgdh`) between an ephemeral Curve25519 key and recipient fetching key (medium/long-term Curve25519 DH keypair).
- Sender sends an envelope, representing the entire payload to the sever, that contains:
  - the message ciphertext (classical/PQ hybrid, via HPKEAuthPSK)
  - the sealed metadata (hybrid, via XWING)
  - the encapsulation of the metadata shared secret (hybrid, via XWING)
  - the two parts of the mgdh/"clue" (classical/plaintext pubkey, via DH agreement between ephemeral Curve25519 key and recipient Curve25519 Fetching key)
- Note: this payload is represented as (Ciphertext, Clue, Clue Pubkey) in many of our documents, where "ciphertext" refers to the combination of message ciphertext, metadata ciphertext, and metadata shared secret encapsulation.

### Fetch

- Discussed separately below

### Read (decrypt)

(Presumes already retrieved encrypted payload via fetch mechanism)

- Recipient parses payload into metadata, metadata encapsulated secret, and ciphertext
- Recipient opens unauthenticated metadata (hybrid XWING encrypted): `HPKE_METADATA.Open(shared_md_secret_encaps, self.metadata_decaps_key, HPKE_INFO, HPKE_AAD, ct=cmetadata)`
- Recipient parses untrusted metadata into: sender DH-AKEM key, message DH-AKEM shared secret, message PSK shared secret
- Recipient decapsulates message PSK secret using $`R_{pq,sk}`$
- Recipient opens authenticated-sealed ciphertext using HPKE.OpenAuth: `HPKE_MESSAGE.OpenAuth(shared_dhakem_secret_encaps, self.dhakem_decaps_key, HPKE_INFO, HPKE_AAD, ct=cmessage, psk=psk_untrusted, psk_id=HPKE_PSK_ID, pk_s=sender_pkey_bytes_untrusted)`
- Recipient performs all needed checks (i.e., ensure keys provided in unauthenticated-sealed metadata match keys/key identifiers in plaintext, etc)

### Reply (journalist -> source)

- Journalist uses long-term DH-AKEM key to auth-encrypt a message to source and then (unanthenticated) encrypt the message metadata, as above, using the keys (DH-AKEM messgage key, PQ KEM PSK key, XWing metadata key) that the source provided in their message.
- Unlike source, the journalist does not need to attach their keys aside from the DH-AKEM reply key. The source will select a new one-time key bundle if they wish to reply.

### Read a reply (source)

- As the journalist does above, the source fetches their message(s) using the fetching protocol.
- After opening the metadata, the source additionally verifies that the pubkey provided in the metadata matches a DH-AKEM pubkey (see "initial keys fetch (`/journalists`)" above.)

### Message fetch overview

#### Server

- Along with ciphertext, Sender includes (Clue, Pubkey) in payload, per above. Those are a one-time DH 25519 Pubkey and the DH agreement between that key and the recipient fetch key. The server stores these data and generates a random corresponding UUID, `message_id`, to refer to the location of the ciphertext in its database (don't want to index by incremental values such as row number, since that leaks information to anyone fetching).
- For every fetch request it receives, the server:
  - Generates an ephemeral DH Curve25519 keypair
  - Performs a DH agreement between the existing mgdh/clue and this ephemeral key (3-party DH); the resulting secret is the `kmid`.
  - Symmetrically encrypts the `message_id` UUID with this `kmid`.
  - Performs an DH agreement between the Clue Pubkey and its ephemeral key (2 party DH), called the per-request clue, per-message [per-request] group Diffie Hellman, or `pmgdh`
  - Returns the encrypted message id and the per-request clue
  - Returns additional (dummy) encrypted challenges, so that the number of challenges returned is always constant.

#### Receipient

- Recipient receives a fixed-length, unique per-request set of challenges consisting of tuples of (Per-Message Clue, Encrypted Message ID).
- For each challenge:
  - Recipient performs a DH agreement on each per-request clue/`pmgdh` (3-party), resulting in an output.
  - If they are the intended recipient of a message, this output is the `kmid` that
    the server used to encrypt the message IDs. (Original kmid: constructed via DH(Clue, Server Epehemral SK) == DH(DH(ME_SK, JF_PK),SE_SK); clue constructed via DH(Clue Pubkey, Server Ephemeral SK) == DH(ME_PK, SE_SK); unwinding clue is DH(DH(ME_PK, SE_SK), JF_SK))
- The recipient attempts to decrypt the Encrypted Message ID with the kmid. If successful, they have learned a message id.
- Recipient sends fetch request for the message id.

## Additional notes

### Messaging

- Presumes Newsroom PKI set up (ie FPF has signed Newsroom key, newsroom has signed journalist signing keys. Still TBD whether newsroom or journalist signs journo fetching key.)
- Fetching key lifetime still TBD; might want to make it easier to roll than the journo signing key
- Presumes source verifies signatures on keys before using (omits error checking)
- Source creates message for each journalist individually (n journalists)
- Journalist creates reply for all other journalists + source (n-1 + 1 = n, to be sure that ciphertext numbers match in each direction and avoid attacks that allow for probabilistically identifying a user's role)
- Still for discussion: when key fetch happens (re: key exhaustion, re: avoiding as much timing leakage as possible about lurkers/instance traffic)
- Still for discussion: Message (plaintext) structure. Includes at minimum the pubkeys needed for replies, but could also include NR key/identifier (avoid cross-instance replays), additional application-level metadata.
- "Clue" (output of DH agreement) needs to be exposed by whatever primitives library we are using.
- Error-handling/robust implementation details omitted for clarity for now

### Fetch/delete

- Fuzzy message expiry planned for messages on server (vs one-time delivery, sending a message to the server upon read, or any other mechanisms). This contrasts with the Tamarin model in progres where one-time message delivery is modeled.
- Some discussion about issuing one fetch request (one ID per request) vs fetching multiple IDs at once. For now assume one fetch request is one message ID.
- The ephemeral key used by the sender to generate the Clue isn't included anywhere or bound to the ciphertext at all; in previous designs it was the message ephemeral pubkey. EthZ says it is by design that nothing can link the key to the message; however, is it worth considering identifying the key _inside_ the message ciphertext (eg a key hash)?

\*\*\*: In a unidirectional dead-drop mode, attaching these PQ keys could be avoided, since they are only used for replies.
